The Project Gutenberg EBook of All Cats Are Gray, by Andre Alice Norton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: All Cats Are Gray

Author: Andre Alice Norton

Release Date: June 1, 2009 [EBook #29019]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL CATS ARE GRAY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's note:                                          |
  |                                                              |
  | This story was published in _Fantastic Universe Science      |
  | Fiction_, August-September 1953. Extensive research did not  |
  | uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this         |
  | publication was renewed.                                     |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+




_An odd story, made up of oddly assorted elements that include a man,
a woman, a black cat, a treasure--and an invisible being that had to
be seen to be believed._




                                     all
                                    cats
                                     are
                                    gray


                    _by ... Andrew North_


    Under normal conditions a whole person has a decided advantage
    over a handicapped one. But out in deep space the normal may
    be reversed--for humans at any rate.


Steena of the spaceways--that sounds just like a corny title for one of
the Stellar-Vedo spreads. I ought to know, I've tried my hand at writing
enough of them. Only this Steena was no glamour babe. She was as
colorless as a Lunar plant--even the hair netted down to her skull had a
sort of grayish cast and I never saw her but once draped in anything but
a shapeless and baggy gray space-all.

Steena was strictly background stuff and that is where she mostly spent
her free hours--in the smelly smoky background corners of any
stellar-port dive frequented by free spacers. If you really looked for
her you could spot her--just sitting there listening to the
talk--listening and remembering. She didn't open her own mouth often.
But when she did spacers had learned to listen. And the lucky few who
heard her rare spoken words--these will never forget Steena.

She drifted from port to port. Being an expert operator on the big
calculators she found jobs wherever she cared to stay for a time. And
she came to be something like the master-minded machines she
tended--smooth, gray, without much personality of her own.

But it was Steena who told Bub Nelson about the Jovan moon-rites--and
her warning saved Bub's life six months later. It was Steena who
identified the piece of stone Keene Clark was passing around a table one
night, rightly calling it unworked Slitite. That started a rush which
made ten fortunes overnight for men who were down to their last jets.
And, last of all, she cracked the case of the _Empress of Mars_.

All the boys who had profited by her queer store of knowledge and her
photographic memory tried at one time or another to balance the scales.
But she wouldn't take so much as a cup of Canal water at their expense,
let alone the credits they tried to push on her. Bub Nelson was the only
one who got around her refusal. It was he who brought her Bat.

About a year after the Jovan affair he walked into the Free Fall one
night and dumped Bat down on her table. Bat looked at Steena and
growled. She looked calmly back at him and nodded once. From then on
they traveled together--the thin gray woman and the big gray tom-cat.
Bat learned to know the inside of more stellar bars than even most
spacers visit in their lifetimes. He developed a liking for Vernal
juice, drank it neat and quick, right out of a glass. And he was always
at home on any table where Steena elected to drop him.

This is really the story of Steena, Bat, Cliff Moran and the _Empress of
Mars_, a story which is already a legend of the spaceways. And it's a
damn good story too. I ought to know, having framed the first version of
it myself.

For I was there, right in the Rigel Royal, when it all began on the
night that Cliff Moran blew in, looking lower than an antman's belly and
twice as nasty. He'd had a spell of luck foul enough to twist a man into
a slug-snake and we all knew that there was an attachment out for his
ship. Cliff had fought his way up from the back courts of Venaport. Lose
his ship and he'd slip back there--to rot. He was at the snarling stage
that night when he picked out a table for himself and set out to drink
away his troubles.

However, just as the first bottle arrived, so did a visitor. Steena came
out of her corner, Bat curled around her shoulders stole-wise, his
favorite mode of travel. She crossed over and dropped down without
invitation at Cliff's side. That shook him out of his sulks. Because
Steena never chose company when she could be alone. If one of the
man-stones on Ganymede had come stumping in, it wouldn't have made more
of us look out of the corners of our eyes.

She stretched out one long-fingered hand and set aside the bottle he had
ordered and said only one thing, "It's about time for the _Empress of
Mars_ to appear again."

Cliff scowled and bit his lip. He was tough, tough as jet lining--you
have to be granite inside and out to struggle up from Venaport to a ship
command. But we could guess what was running through his mind at that
moment. The _Empress of Mars_ was just about the biggest prize a spacer
could aim for. But in the fifty years she had been following her queer
derelict orbit through space many men had tried to bring her in--and
none had succeeded.

A pleasure-ship carrying untold wealth, she had been mysteriously
abandoned in space by passengers and crew, none of whom had ever been
seen or heard of again. At intervals thereafter she had been sighted,
even boarded. Those who ventured into her either vanished or returned
swiftly without any believable explanation of what they had
seen--wanting only to get away from her as quickly as possible. But the
man who could bring her in--or even strip her clean in space--that man
would win the jackpot.

"All right!" Cliff slammed his fist down on the table. "I'll try even
that!"

Steena looked at him, much as she must have looked at Bat the day Bub
Nelson brought him to her, and nodded. That was all I saw. The rest of
the story came to me in pieces, months later and in another port half
the System away.

Cliff took off that night. He was afraid to risk waiting--with a writ
out that could pull the ship from under him. And it wasn't until he was
in space that he discovered his passengers--Steena and Bat. We'll never
know what happened then. I'm betting that Steena made no explanation at
all. She wouldn't.

It was the first time she had decided to cash in on her own tip and she
was there--that was all. Maybe that point weighed with Cliff, maybe he
just didn't care. Anyway the three were together when they sighted the
_Empress_ riding, her dead-lights gleaming, a ghost ship in night space.

She must have been an eerie sight because her other lights were on too,
in addition to the red warnings at her nose. She seemed alive, a Flying
Dutchman of space. Cliff worked his ship skillfully alongside and had no
trouble in snapping magnetic lines to her lock. Some minutes later the
three of them passed into her. There was still air in her cabins and
corridors. Air that bore a faint corrupt taint which set Bat to sniffing
greedily and could be picked up even by the less sensitive human
nostrils.

Cliff headed straight for the control cabin but Steena and Bat went
prowling. Closed doors were a challenge to both of them and Steena
opened each as she passed, taking a quick look at what lay within. The
fifth door opened on a room which no woman could leave without further
investigation.

I don't know who had been housed there when the _Empress_ left port on
her last lengthy cruise. Anyone really curious can check back on the old
photo-reg cards. But there was a lavish display of silks trailing out of
two travel kits on the floor, a dressing table crowded with crystal and
jeweled containers, along with other lures for the female which drew
Steena in. She was standing in front of the dressing table when she
glanced into the mirror--glanced into it and froze.

Over her right shoulder she could see the spider-silk cover on the bed.
Right in the middle of that sheer, gossamer expanse was a sparkling heap
of gems, the dumped contents of some jewel case. Bat had jumped to the
foot of the bed and flattened out as cats will, watching those gems,
watching them and--something else!

Steena put out her hand blindly and caught up the nearest bottle. As she
unstoppered it she watched the mirrored bed. A gemmed bracelet rose from
the pile, rose in the air and tinkled its siren song. It was as if an
idle hand played.... Bat spat almost noiselessly. But he did not
retreat. Bat had not yet decided his course.

She put down the bottle. Then she did something which perhaps few of the
men she had listened to through the years could have done. She moved
without hurry or sign of disturbance on a tour about the room. And,
although she approached the bed she did not touch the jewels. She could
not force herself to that. It took her five minutes to play out her
innocence and unconcern. Then it was Bat who decided the issue.

He leaped from the bed and escorted something to the door, remaining a
careful distance behind. Then he mewed loudly twice. Steena followed him
and opened the door wider.

Bat went straight on down the corridor, as intent as a hound on the
warmest of scents. Steena strolled behind him, holding her pace to the
unhurried gait of an explorer. What sped before them both was invisible
to her but Bat was never baffled by it.

They must have gone into the control cabin almost on the heels of the
unseen--if the unseen had heels, which there was good reason to
doubt--for Bat crouched just within the doorway and refused to move on.
Steena looked down the length of the instrument panels and officers'
station-seats to where Cliff Moran worked. On the heavy carpet her boots
made no sound and he did not glance up but sat humming through set teeth
as he tested the tardy and reluctant responses to buttons which had not
been pushed in years.

To human eyes they were alone in the cabin. But Bat still followed a
moving something with his gaze. And it was something which he had at
last made up his mind to distrust and dislike. For now he took a step or
two forward and spat--his loathing made plain by every raised hair along
his spine. And in that same moment Steena saw a flicker--a flicker of
vague outline against Cliff's hunched shoulders as if the invisible one
had crossed the space between them.

But why had it been revealed against Cliff and not against the back of
one of the seats or against the panels, the walls of the corridor or the
cover of the bed where it had reclined and played with its loot? What
could Bat see?

The storehouse memory that had served Steena so well through the years
clicked open a half-forgotten door. With one swift motion she tore loose
her spaceall and flung the baggy garment across the back of the nearest
seat.

Bat was snarling now, emitting the throaty rising cry that was his
hunting song. But he was edging back, back toward Steena's feet,
shrinking from something he could not fight but which he faced
defiantly. If he could draw it after him, past that dangling
spaceall.... He had to--it was their only chance.

"What the...." Cliff had come out of his seat and was staring at them.

What he saw must have been weird enough. Steena, bare-armed and
shouldered, her usually stiffly-netted hair falling wildly down her
back, Steena watching empty space with narrowed eyes and set mouth,
calculating a single wild chance. Bat, crouched on his belly, retreating
from thin air step by step and wailing like a demon.

"Toss me your blaster." Steena gave the order calmly--as if they still
sat at their table in the Rigel Royal.

And as quietly Cliff obeyed. She caught the small weapon out of the air
with a steady hand--caught and leveled it.

"Stay just where you are!" she warned. "Back, Bat, bring it back!"

With a last throat-splitting screech of rage and hate, Bat twisted to
safety between her boots. She pressed with thumb and forefinger, firing
at the spacealls. The material turned to powdery flakes of ash--except
for certain bits which still flapped from the scorched seat--as if
something had protected them from the force of the blast. Bat sprang
straight up in the air with a scream that tore their ears.

"What...?" began Cliff again.

Steena made a warning motion with her left hand. "_Wait!_"

She was still tense, still watching Bat. The cat dashed madly around the
cabin twice, running crazily with white-ringed eyes and flecks of foam
on his muzzle. Then he stopped abruptly in the doorway, stopped and
looked back over his shoulder for a long silent moment. He sniffed
delicately.

Steena and Cliff could smell it too now, a thick oily stench which was
not the usual odor left by an exploding blaster-shell.

Bat came back, treading daintily across the carpet, almost on the tips
of his paws. He raised his head as he passed Steena and then he went
confidently beyond to sniff, to sniff and spit twice at the unburned
strips of the spaceall. Having thus paid his respects to the late enemy
he sat down calmly and set to washing his fur with deliberation. Steena
sighed once and dropped into the navigator's seat.

"Maybe now you'll tell me what in the hell's happened?" Cliff exploded
as he took the blaster out of her hand.

"Gray," she said dazedly, "it must have been gray--or I couldn't have
seen it like that. I'm colorblind, you see. I can see only shades of
gray--my whole world is gray. Like Bat's--his world is gray too--all
gray. But he's been compensated for he can see above and below our range
of color vibrations and--apparently--so can I!"


Her voice quavered and she raised her chin with a new air Cliff had
never seen before--a sort of proud acceptance. She pushed back her
wandering hair, but she made no move to imprison it under the heavy net
again.

"That is why I saw the thing when it crossed between us. Against your
spaceall it was another shade of gray--an outline. So I put out mine and
waited for it to show against that--it was our only chance, Cliff.

"It was curious at first, I think, and it knew we couldn't see it--which
is why it waited to attack. But when Bat's actions gave it away it
moved. So I waited to see that flicker against the spaceall and then I
let him have it. It's really very simple...."

Cliff laughed a bit shakily. "But what _was_ this gray thing? I don't
get it."

"I think it was what made the _Empress_ a derelict. Something out of
space, maybe, or from another world somewhere." She waved her hands.
"It's invisible because it's a color beyond our range of sight. It must
have stayed in here all these years. And it kills--it must--when its
curiosity is satisfied." Swiftly she described the scene in the cabin
and the strange behavior of the gem pile which had betrayed the creature
to her.

Cliff did not return his blaster to its holder. "Any more of them on
board, d'you think?" He didn't look pleased at the prospect.

Steena turned to Bat. He was paying particular attention to the space
between two front toes in the process of a complete bath. "I don't think
so. But Bat will tell us if there are. He can see them clearly, I
believe."

But there weren't any more and two weeks later Cliff, Steena and Bat
brought the _Empress_ into the Lunar quarantine station. And that is the
end of Steena's story because, as we have been told, happy marriages
need no chronicles. And Steena had found someone who knew of her gray
world and did not find it too hard to share with her--someone besides
Bat. It turned out to be a real love match.

The last time I saw her she was wrapped in a flame-red cloak from the
looms of Rigel and wore a fortune in Jovan rubies blazing on her wrists.
Cliff was flipping a three-figure credit bill to a waiter. And Bat had a
row of Vernal juice glasses set up before him. Just a little family
party out on the town.




  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's note:                                          |
  |                                                              |
  | Inconsistent hyphenation (space-all/spaceall) has been       |
  | retained.                                                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of All Cats Are Gray, by Andre Alice Norton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL CATS ARE GRAY ***

***** This file should be named 29019.txt or 29019.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/0/1/29019/

Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
